feat: create V3 documentation outline (#948)
langfuse/langfuse-docs: pages/docs/deployment/migrate-v2-to-v3.mdx

---
description: A guide to upgrade a Langfuse V2 setup to V3.
---

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";

# Migrate Langfuse V2 to V3

<Callout type="warning">
  This guide covers a developer preview which is **not suitable for production use**.
  V3 is under active development and we plan to ship a production-ready version by the end of November 2024.
  We share this information to gather feedback from our awesome developer community.

  For a production-ready setup, follow the [self-hosting guide](/docs/deployment/self-host)
  or consider using [Langfuse Cloud](https://cloud.langfuse.com) maintained by the Langfuse team.

  If you want to get started on V3, please follow our [V3 Self-Host Guide](/docs/deployment/self-host-v3).
</Callout>

> ## Reasoning

Reviewer: I would probably move reasoning to the bottom and just refer to it with a link to the anchor at the top. Not relevant for "migrate" task but good to know as it motivates this change

### Why S3/Blob Store

Observability data for LLM application tends to contain large, semi-structured bodies of data to represent inputs and outputs.
We chose S3/Blob Store as a scalable, secure, and cost-effective solution to store these large objects.
It allows us to store all incoming events for further processing and acts as a native backup solution, as the full state
can be restored based on the events stored there.

### Why Worker Container

When processing observability data for LLM applications, there are many CPU-heavy operations which block the main loop in our Node.js backend,
e.g. tokenization and other parsing of event bodies.
To achieve high availability and low latencies across client applications, we decided to move the heavy processing into an asynchronous worker container.
It accepts events from a Redis queue and ensures that they are eventually being upserted into Clickhouse.

## SDK compatibility and API changes

While we aim to keep our SDKs and APIs fully backwards compatible, we have to introduce backwards incompatible changes with our update to V3.

> Certain APIs in SDK versions below version 2.0.0 are not compatible with our new backend architecture.

Reviewer: i'd mention when these were released to make clear these are very old sdks

> Please upgrade and benefit from many performance improvements or features such as [prompt caching](https://langfuse.com/changelog/2024-02-05-sdk-level-prompt-caching).

Reviewer: for links in our documentation, relative links are strongly preferred
- they work in development
- they use next Link which does not need a pageload to render the next page in prod

If you rely on this data and access it in the code, your SDK will break as of Nov. 11th, 2024 for the cloud version and post-upgrade for self-hosted versions.

### API Changes

#### POST /api/public/ingestion

The `/api/public/ingestion` endpoint is now asynchronous.
It will accept all events as they come in and queue them for processing before returning a 207 status code.
This means that events will _not_ be available immediately after acceptance by the backend and instead will appear
eventually in subsequent read requests.

The individual events accepted a `metadata` property within their body of type `string | string[] | Record<string, unknown>`.
Only the `Record` type is supported within our UI and endpoints to perform queries and filter events.
Therefore, we enforce an object type for `metadata` going forward.
All incoming events with `{ metadata: string | string[] }` will have their metadata mapped to an object with key `metadata`,
i.e. `{ event: { body: { metadata: "test" } } }` will be transformed to `{ event: { body: { metadata: { metadata: "test" } } } }`.

> #### POST /api/public/scores

Reviewer: i'd include who does not need to worry about this, everyone using sdks as they do not use this endpoint

The `/api/public/scores` endpoint is now asynchronous.
It behaves exactly as the `/api/public/ingestion` endpoint, but will return a 200 status code with a body of `{ id: string }` type.
Before, the endpoint returned the created score object directly.
This change is inline with our [API reference](https://api.reference.langfuse.com/#post-/api/public/scores) and therefore not considered breaking.

#### Deprecated endpoints

The following endpoints are deprecated since our V2 release.
We continue to accept requests to these endpoints and will remove them in a future release.

> Their API behaviour changes to be asynchronous and the endpoints will only return the id of the created object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Their API behavior changes to be asynchronous and the endpoints will only return the id of the created object instead of the full updated record.
```

sth like this or similar to make clear what the difference is in this change

behavior (AE)

- POST /api/public/events
- POST /api/public/generations
- PATCH /api/public/generations
- POST /api/public/spans
- PATCH /api/public/spans

> - POSt /api/public/traces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- POST /api/public/traces
```

Ensure that you deploy all required storage components (Clickhouse, Redis, S3/Blob Store) and have the connection information handy.
You can reuse your existing Postgres instance for the new deployment.
Ensure that you also have your Postgres connection details ready.

#### 2. Start new Langfuse containers.

Deploy the Langfuse web and worker containers with the settings from our self-hosting guide.
Ensure that you set the environment variables for the new storage components and the Postgres connection details.

At this point, you can start to test the new Langfuse instance.
The UI should load as expected, but there should not be any traces, observations, or scores.
This is expected, as data is being read from Clickhouse while those elements still reside in Postgres.

#### 3. Shift traffic from V2 to V3

Point the traffic to the new Langfuse instance by updating your DNS records or your Loadbalancer configuration.
All new events will be stored in Clickhouse and should appear within the UI within a few seconds of being ingested.

#### 4. Wait for historic data migration to complete

We have introduced background migrations as part of the migration to V3.

> Those allow the Langfuse team to schedule longer-running migrations without impacting the availability of the service.

Reviewer: I would not use "Langfuse team" but rather mention that "Langfuse" does something as the person who wrote the migration could be on the core team of maintainers but does not need to
